Insomnia drug may lower levels of Alzheimer’s proteins | National Institute on Aging
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here's how you know
Here's how you know
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services (HHS)
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
The .gov means it’s official.
Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before sharing sensitive information, make sure you’re on a federal government site.
The site is secure.
The
https://
ensures that you are connecting to the official website and that any information you provide is encrypted and transmitted securely.
Menu
Search
Search
Health Information
A-Z Health Topics
Alzheimer's & Related Dementias
Caregiving
Cognitive Health
End of Life
Exercise and Physical Activity
Healthy Eating
Español
Get Print Publications
Infographics
Resources for Health Care Professionals
Research & Funding
All Research & Funding
Blog - Inside NIA
Clinical Trials
Training & Career Development
Grants & Funding
Health Disparities Research
Research Resources
Labs at NIA
Division of Aging Biology
Division of Behavioral and Social Research
Division of Geriatrics and Clinical Gerontology
Division of Neuroscience
Division of Extramural Activities
Quick Links
NIA-Specific Funding Policies
Scientific Review
Small Business Program
Training Opportunities for Special Populations
Alzheimer's Disease and Related Dementias Funding Announcements
News & Events
All News & Events
News Releases
Announcements
Events
Research Highlights
Multimedia
Quick Links
Media Inquiries
Alzheimer’s & Related Dementias Press Kit
About NIA
All About NIA
Budget & Testimony
Strategic Directions
National Advisory Council on Aging (NACA)
Advances in Aging and Alzheimer's Research
Scientific Workforce Diversity
Staff Directory
Careers
Student Resources
Connect with NIA
Contact NIA
Español
Search
Search
Breadcrumb
Home
News & Events
Insomnia drug may lower levels of Alzheimer’s proteins
Research Highlights
Insomnia drug may lower levels of Alzheimer’s proteins
May 25, 2023
NeuroscienceAlzheimer's Disease
From NIH Research Matters
In Alzheimer’s disease, proteins called amyloid-β and tau build up in and around neurons in the brain, eventually causing their death. This loss of brain cells leads to dementia. More than 6 million people in the U.S. are thought to be living with Alzheimer’s disease, and this number is expected to grow in the coming decades. Scientists have been working to develop treatments that can slow, stop, or even reverse the damage seen in Alzheimer’s disease.
Tau protein (light blue) in a cell model of tauopathy — the aggregation of tau protein. Researchers believe that tauopathy plays a role in Alzheimer’s disease and other neurodegenerative diseases. Melina Gyparaki, Melike Lakadamyali’s lab, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of PennsylvaniaResearchers have been experimenting with drugs approved for other uses to see if any have effects in Alzheimer’s disease. Testing previously approved drugs has the potential to speed clinical trials for dementia prevention and treatment.
Past studies have found links between poor sleep and Alzheimer’s disease. Poor sleep may contribute to dementia risk. The development of cognitive decline and dementia may also disrupt sleep.
Recently, a class of drugs called dual orexin receptor antagonists (DORAs) has been developed to help treat insomnia. Orexin is a chemical in the brain that promotes wakefulness. By blocking orexin, these drugs can help people fall asleep.
Previous studies suggested that orexin may play a role in the development of Alzheimer’s disease. In mice, blocking orexin with a DORA reduced levels of amyloid-β in the brain. To see if something similar might happen in people, NIH-funded researchers led by Dr. Brendan Lucey from Washington University in St. Louis recruited 38 volunteers into a small, proof-of-concept study.
All participants were between the ages of 45 to 65 and cognitively healthy. The researchers randomly assigned them to receive either two higher doses of a DORA called suvorexant over 36 hours, two lower doses of suvorexant, or a placebo.
The team then measured changes in levels of amyloid-β and a form of tau called phosphorylated tau in the cerebrospinal fluid. (Phosphorylation is a modification that contributes to the process that causes tau to tangle in the brain.) The study results were published on March 10, 2023, in Annals of Neurology.
People receiving suvorexant didn’t show an increase in sleep time or quality over the night of the study. But those who received the higher dose of the drug showed a 10-15% drop in phosphorylation at a site on tau that contributes to tau tangles. By a day after administration, tau phosphorylation had increased back to levels seen in the placebo group. But it dropped again after the second dose of the drug.
Similar results were seen for amyloid-β levels in the cerebrospinal fluid. By 12 hours after receiving high-dose suvorexant, participants had amyloid-β levels 10-20% lower than those in the placebo group. These levels increased over time, then dropped again after a second dose of the drug.
“We don’t yet know whether long-term use [of suvorexant] is effective in staving off cognitive decline, and if it is, at what dose and for whom,” Lucey says. “Still, these results are very encouraging. This drug is already available and proven safe, and now we have evidence that it affects the levels of proteins that are critical for driving Alzheimer’s disease.”
The researchers are now launching a clinical trial to study the longer-term effects of orexin inhibition on people who are at risk for developing dementia. Further study will also be needed to better understand the mechanisms by which this approach may affect development of Alzheimer’s disease.
— by Sharon Reynolds
This research was supported in part by NIA grant K76AG054863.
Reference: Lucey BP, et al. Suvorexant acutely decreases tau phosphorylation and Aβ in the human CNS. Ann Neurol. 2023. Epub Mar 10. doi: 10.1002/ana.26641.
Latest News
Insomnia drug may lower levels of Alzheimer’s proteins
05/25/2023
Return to top
Quick links
A-Z health topics
Clinical trials
Careers
Research divisions & contacts
Staff directory
Workforce diversity
NIH COVID-19 information
Contact NIA
niaic@nia.nih.gov
800-222-2225
Contact us
Follow us
Facebook
Twitter
LinkedIn
YouTube
Newsletters
Sign up to receive updates and resources delivered to your inbox.
Sign up
nia.nih.gov
An official website of the National Institutes of Health
Accessibility support
FOIA requests
No FEAR Act data
Office of the Inspector General
Performance reports
Vulnerability disclosure policy
Policies and notices
USA.gov