Alzheimer's treatments: What's on the horizon? - Mayo Clinic
This content does not have an English version.
This content does not have an Arabic version.
Skip to contentCare at
Mayo Clinic Care at Mayo Clinic About Mayo Clinic Request Appointment Find a Doctor Clinical Trials Connect to Support Groups Patient & Visitor Guide Insurance & Billing Departments & Centers International Services Contact UsPatient & Visitor Guide Health
Library Diseases & Conditions Symptoms Tests & Procedures Drugs & Supplements Healthy Lifestyle Books & SubscriptionsDiseases & Conditions For Medical
Professionals Medical Professional Resources Refer a Patient Continuing Medical Education AskMayoExpert Mayo Clinic Laboratories Video Center Journals & Publications Mayo Clinic Alumni AssociationContinuing Medical Education Research & Education
at Mayo ClinicResearch Research at Mayo Clinic Research Faculty Laboratories Core Facilities Centers & Programs Departments & Divisions Clinical Trials Institutional Review Board Postdoctoral Fellowships Training Grant ProgramsEducation Mayo Clinic College of Medicine and Science Mayo Clinic Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences Mayo Clinic Alix School of Medicine Mayo Clinic School of Graduate Medical Education Mayo Clinic School of Health Sciences Mayo Clinic School of Continuous Professional DevelopmentMayo Clinic College of Medicine and Science
Request appointment Donate Log inSearchMenu Request appointment Donate Diseases & conditions Find a doctorCare at Mayo Clinic Care at Mayo Clinic About Mayo Clinic Request Appointment Find a Doctor Clinical Trials Connect to Support Groups Patient & Visitor Guide Insurance & Billing Departments & Centers International Services Contact UsPatient & Visitor Guide Health Library Diseases & Conditions Symptoms Tests & Procedures Drugs & Supplements Healthy Lifestyle Books & SubscriptionsDiseases & Conditions For Medical Professionals Medical Professional Resources Refer a Patient Continuing Medical Education AskMayoExpert Mayo Clinic Laboratories Video Center Journals & Publications Mayo Clinic Alumni AssociationContinuing Medical Education Research & Education at Mayo ClinicResearch Research at Mayo Clinic Research Faculty Laboratories Core Facilities Centers & Programs Departments & Divisions Clinical Trials Institutional Review Board Postdoctoral Fellowships Training Grant ProgramsEducation Mayo Clinic College of Medicine and Science Mayo Clinic Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences Mayo Clinic Alix School of Medicine Mayo Clinic School of Graduate Medical Education Mayo Clinic School of Health Sciences Mayo Clinic School of Continuous Professional DevelopmentMayo Clinic College of Medicine and Science
Appointments at Mayo Clinic
Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Request Appointment
Alzheimer's treatments: What's on the horizon?
Print
Sections
Products and services
Alzheimer's treatments: What's on the horizon?Despite many promising leads, new treatments for Alzheimer's are slow to emerge.By Mayo Clinic Staff
Current Alzheimer's treatments temporarily improve symptoms of memory loss and problems with thinking and reasoning.
These Alzheimer's treatments boost the performance of chemicals in the brain that carry information from one brain cell to another. They include cholinesterase inhibitors and the medicine memantine (Namenda). However, these treatments don't stop the underlying decline and death of brain cells. As more cells die, Alzheimer's disease continues to progress.
Experts are cautious but hopeful about developing treatments that can stop or delay the progression of Alzheimer's. Experts continue to better understand how the disease changes the brain. This has led to the research of potential Alzheimer's treatments that may affect the disease process.
Future Alzheimer's treatments may include a combination of medicines. This is similar to treatments for many cancers or HIV/AIDS that include more than one medicine.
These are some of the strategies currently being studied.
Taking aim at plaques
Some of the new Alzheimer's treatments target clumps of the protein beta-amyloid, known as plaques, in the brain. Plaques are a characteristic sign of Alzheimer's disease.
Strategies aimed at beta-amyloid include:
Recruiting the immune system. Medicines known as monoclonal antibodies may prevent beta-amyloid from clumping into plaques. They also may remove beta-amyloid plaques that have formed. They do this by helping the body clear them from the brain. These medicines mimic the antibodies your body naturally produces as part of your immune system's response to foreign invaders or vaccines.
In June 2021, the U.S. Food and Drug Association (FDA) approved the monoclonal antibody aducanumab (Aduhelm) for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease in some people. The medicine was studied in people living with early Alzheimer's disease, including people with mild cognitive impairment due to Alzheimer's disease.
The medicine was approved in the United States because it removes beta-amyloid plaques. But it hasn't been widely used. Studies about its effectiveness at slowing cognitive decline are mixed. Insurance coverage also is limited.
Another Alzheimer's medicine, lecanemab (Leqembi), has shown promise for people with mild Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment due to Alzheimer's disease. The FDA approved the medicine in 2023. The medicine is given through an IV in the arm.
A phase 3 clinical trial found that lecanemab slowed cognitive decline in people with early Alzheimer's disease by 27%. It works by removing beta-amyloid plaques in the brain. This study was the largest so far to look at whether clearing clumps of beta-amyloid plaques from the brain can slow the disease.
Another ongoing study is looking at how effective lecanemab may be for people at risk of Alzheimer's disease. This includes people who have a first-degree relative, such as a parent or sibling, with the disease.
Donanemab, another monoclonal antibody, also has shown promise. The medicine has moved into a phase 3 study. Results are expected in 2023.
However, the monoclonal antibody solanezumab did not show benefits for individuals with preclinical, mild or moderate Alzheimer's disease. Solanezumab did not lower beta-amyloid in the brain, which may be why it wasn't effective.
Preventing destruction. A medicine initially developed as a possible cancer treatment — saracatinib — is now being tested in Alzheimer's disease.
In mice, saracatinib turned off a protein that allowed synapses to start working again. Synapses are the tiny spaces between brain cells through which the cells communicate. The animals in the study experienced a reversal of some memory loss. Human trials for saracatinib as a possible Alzheimer's treatment are now underway.
Production blockers. These therapies may reduce the amount of beta-amyloid formed in the brain. Research has shown that beta-amyloid is produced from a "parent protein" in two steps performed by different enzymes.
Several experimental medicines aim to block the activity of these enzymes. They're known as beta- and gamma-secretase inhibitors. Recent studies showed that the beta-secretase inhibitors did not slow cognitive decline. They also were associated with significant side effects in those with mild or moderate Alzheimer's. This has decreased enthusiasm for the medicines.
Keeping tau from tangling
A vital brain cell transport system collapses when a protein called tau twists into tiny fibers. These fibers are called tangles. They are another common change in the brains of people with Alzheimer's. Researchers are looking at a way to prevent tau from forming tangles.
Tau aggregation inhibitors and tau vaccines are currently being studied in clinical trials.
Reducing inflammation
Alzheimer's causes chronic, low-level brain cell inflammation. Researchers are studying ways to treat the processes that lead to inflammation in Alzheimer's disease. The medicine sargramostim (Leukine) is currently in research. The medicine may stimulate the immune system to protect the brain from harmful proteins.
Researching insulin resistance
Studies are looking into how insulin may affect the brain and brain cell function. Researchers are studying how insulin changes in the brain may be related to Alzheimer's. However, a trial testing of an insulin nasal spray determined that the medicine wasn't effective in slowing the progression of Alzheimer's.
Studying the heart-head connection
Growing evidence suggests that brain health is closely linked to heart and blood vessel health. The risk of developing dementia appears to increase as a result of many conditions that damage the heart or arteries. These include high blood pressure, heart disease, stroke, diabetes and high cholesterol.
A number of studies are exploring how best to build on this connection. Strategies being researched include:
Current medicines for heart disease risk factors. Researchers are looking into whether blood pressure medicines may benefit people with Alzheimer's. They're also studying whether the medicines may reduce the risk of dementia.
Medicines aimed at new targets. Other studies are looking more closely at how the connection between heart disease and Alzheimer's works at the molecular level. The goal is to find new potential medicines for Alzheimer's.
Lifestyle choices. Research suggests that lifestyle choices with known heart benefits may help prevent Alzheimer's disease or delay its onset. Those lifestyle choices include exercising on most days and eating a heart-healthy diet.
Hormones
Studies during the 1990s suggested that taking hormone replacement therapy during perimenopause and menopause lowered the risk of Alzheimer's disease. But further research has been mixed. Some studies found no cognitive benefit of taking hormone replacement therapy. More research and a better understanding of the relationship between estrogen and cognitive function are needed.
Speeding treatment development
Developing new medicines is a slow process. The pace can be frustrating for people with Alzheimer's and their families who are waiting for new treatment options.
To help speed discovery, the Critical Path for Alzheimer's Disease (CPAD) consortium created a first-of-its-kind partnership to share data from Alzheimer's clinical trials. CPAD's partners include pharmaceutical companies, nonprofit foundations and government advisers. CPAD was formerly called the Coalition Against Major Diseases.
CPAD also has collaborated with the Clinical Data Interchange Standards Consortium to create data standards. Researchers think that data standards and sharing data from thousands of study participants will speed development of more-effective therapies.
There is a problem with
information submitted for this request. Review/update the
information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
From Mayo Clinic to your inbox
Sign up for free, and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips and current health topics, like COVID-19, plus expertise
on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
Email
ErrorEmail field is required
ErrorInclude a valid email address
Learn more about Mayo Clinic’s use of data.
To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which
information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with
other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could
include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected
health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health
information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of
privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on
the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.
Subscribe!
Thank you for subscribing!
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Sorry something went wrong with your subscription
Please, try again in a couple of minutes
Retry
ShareTweet
May 20, 2023
Show references
Treatments and research. Alzheimer's Association. https://www.alz.org/alzheimers-dementia/research_progress/treatment-horizon. Accessed March 23, 2023.
Cummings J, et al. Alzheimer's disease drug development pipeline: 2022. Alzheimer's and Dementia. 2022; doi:10.1002/trc2.12295.
Burns S, et al. Therapeutics of Alzheimer's disease: Recent developments. Antioxidants. 2022; doi:10.3390/antiox11122402.
Plascencia-Villa G, et al. Lessons from antiamyloid-beta immunotherapies in Alzheimer's disease. Handbook of Clinical Neurology. 2023; doi:10.1016/B978-0-323-85555-6.00019-9.
Brockmann R, et al. Impacts of FDA approval and Medicare restriction on antiamyloid therapies for Alzheimer's disease: Patient outcomes, healthcare costs and drug development. The Lancet Regional Health. 2023; doi:10.1016/j.lana.2023.100467.
Wojtunik-Kulesza K, et al. Aducanumab — Hope or disappointment for Alzheimer's disease. International Journal of Molecular Sciences. 2023; doi:10.3390/ijms24054367.
Can Alzheimer's disease be prevented? Alzheimer's Association. http://www.alz.org/research/science/alzheimers_prevention_and_risk.asp. Accessed March 23, 2023.
Piscopo P, et al. A systematic review on drugs for synaptic plasticity in the treatment of dementia. Ageing Research Reviews. 2022; doi:10.1016/j.arr.2022.101726.
Facile R, et al. Use of Clinical Data Interchange Standards Consortium (CDISC) standards for real-world data: Expert perspectives from a qualitative Delphi survey. JMIR Medical Informatics. 2022; doi:10.2196/30363.
Imbimbo BP, et al. Role of monomeric amyloid-beta in cognitive performance in Alzheimer's disease: Insights from clinical trials with secretase inhibitors and monoclonal antibodies. Pharmacological Research. 2023; doi:10.1016/j.phrs.2022.106631.
Conti Filho CE, et al. Advances in Alzheimer's disease's pharmacological treatment. Frontiers in Pharmacology. 2023; doi:10.3389/fphar.2023.1101452.
Potter H, et al. Safety and efficacy of sargramostim (GM-CSF) in the treatment of Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimer's and Dementia. 2021; doi:10.1002/trc2.12158.
Zhong H, et al. Effect of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma agonists on cognitive function: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Biomedicines. 2023; doi:10.3390/biomedicines11020246.
Grodstein F. Estrogen and cognitive function. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/search. Accessed March 23, 2023.
Mills ZB, et al. Is hormone replacement therapy a risk factor or a therapeutic option for Alzheimer's disease? International Journal of Molecular Sciences. 2023; doi:10.3390/ijms24043205.
Custodia A, et al. Biomarkers assessing endothelial dysfunction in Alzheimer's disease. Cells. 2023; doi:10.3390/cells12060962.
Overview. Critical Path for Alzheimer's Disease. https://c-path.org/programs/cpad/. Accessed March 29, 2023.
Shi M, et al. Impact of anti-amyloid-β monoclonal antibodies on the pathology and clinical profile of Alzheimer's disease: A focus on aducanumab and lecanemab. Frontiers in Aging and Neuroscience. 2022; doi:10.3389/fnagi.2022.870517.
See more In-depth
Products and ServicesBook: Mayo Clinic on Alzheimer's DiseaseAssortment of Products for Independent Living from Mayo Clinic StoreBook: Day to Day: Living With DementiaGive today to find Alzheimer's cures for tomorrow
See alsoAlzheimer's sleep problemsAlzheimer's 101Alzheimer's and daily tasksUnderstanding the difference between dementia typesAlzheimer's diseaseAlzheimer's disease: Can exercise prevent memory loss?Alzheimer's drugsAlzheimer's genesAlzheimer's nose spray: New Alzheimer's treatment?Alzheimer's prevention: Does it exist?Alzheimer's stagesAntidepressant withdrawal: Is there such a thing?Antidepressants and alcohol: What's the concern?Antidepressants and weight gain: What causes it?Antidepressants: Can they stop working?Antidepressants: Side effectsAntidepressants: Selecting one that's right for youAntidepressants: Which cause the fewest sexual side effects?Anxiety disordersAtypical antidepressantsCaregiver stressClinical depression: What does that mean?Corticobasal degeneration (corticobasal syndrome)CT scanDepression and anxiety: Can I have both?Depression, anxiety and exerciseWhat is depression? A Mayo Clinic expert explains.Depression: Diagnosis is keyDepression in women: Understanding the gender gapDepression (major depressive disorder)Depression: Provide support, encouragementDepression: Supporting a family member or friendDiagnosing Alzheimer'sDid the definition of Alzheimer's disease change?Intermittent fastingMale depression: Understanding the issuesMAOIs and diet: Is it necessary to restrict tyramine?Marijuana and depressionMayo Clinic Minute: 3 tips to reduce your risk of Alzheimer's diseaseMayo Clinic Minute: Alzheimer's disease risk and lifestyleMayo Clinic Minute New definition of Alzheimer's changesMayo Clinic Minute: Women and Alzheimer's DiseaseMemory loss: When to seek helpMonoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs)MRINatural remedies for depression: Are they effective?Nervous breakdown: What does it mean?New Alzheimers ResearchPain and depression: Is there a link?Phantosmia: What causes olfactory hallucinations?Positron emission tomography scanPosterior cortical atrophySeeing inside the heart with MRISelective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)Serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs)Brain anatomySundowning: Late-day confusionTreatment-resistant depressionTricyclic antidepressants and tetracyclic antidepressantsVideo: Alzheimer's drug shows early promiseMRIVitamin B-12 and depressionYoung-onset Alzheimer'sShow more related content
Advertisement
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Advertising & Sponsorship
Policy
Opportunities
Ad Choices
Mayo Clinic Press
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
Mayo Clinic on Incontinence - Mayo Clinic PressMayo Clinic on IncontinenceNEW – Future Care - Mayo Clinic PressNEW – Future CareMayo Clinic on Hearing and Balance - Mayo Clinic PressMayo Clinic on Hearing and BalanceFREE Mayo Clinic Diet Assessment - Mayo Clinic PressFREE Mayo Clinic Diet AssessmentMayo Clinic Health Letter - FREE book - Mayo Clinic PressMayo Clinic Health Letter - FREE book
Other Topics in Patient Care & Health Info
Diseases & Conditions A-Z
Symptoms A-Z
Tests & Procedures A-Z
Drugs & Supplements A-Z
Health Books
Healthy Living Program
Mayo Clinic Health Letter
.
ART-20047780
Home
Alzheimer s treatments What s on the horizon
Your gift holds great power – donate today! DonateMake your tax-deductible gift and be a part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.
Donate
Find a doctor Explore careers Sign up for free e-newslettersAbout Mayo Clinic
About this Site Contact Us Locations Health Information Policy Media Requests News NetworkMedical Professionals
AskMayoExpert Clinical Trials Mayo Clinic Alumni Association Refer a PatientBusinesses
Executive Health Program International Business Collaborations Facilities & Real Estate Supplier InformationMedical Professionals
AskMayoExpert Clinical Trials Mayo Clinic Alumni Association Refer a PatientBusinesses
Executive Health Program International Business Collaborations Facilities & Real Estate Supplier InformationStudents
Admissions Requirements Degree Programs Student & Faculty PortalStudents
Degree Programs Admissions Requirements Student & Faculty PortalResearchers
Research Faculty LaboratoriesInternational Patients
Appointments Financial Services International Locations & OfficesCharitable Care & Financial Assistance
Community Health Needs Assessment Financial Assistance Documents – Arizona Financial Assistance Documents – Florida Financial Assistance Documents – MinnesotaFollow Mayo Clinic Twitter Youtube Facebook Linkedin InstagramGet the Mayo Clinic app
Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy Notice of Privacy Practices Notice of Nondiscrimination Advertising & Sponsorship Policy Site Map Manage Cookies Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy Notice of Privacy Practices Notice of Nondiscrimination Advertising and Sponsorship Policy Site Map Manage CookiesLanguage:English English Español العربية 简体中文© 1998-2023 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.
Language:English English Español العربية 简体中文