Alzheimer’s progression in Down syndrome appears similar to other genetic, early onset forms of the disease | National Institute on Aging
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here's how you know
Here's how you know
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services (HHS)
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
The .gov means it’s official.
Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before sharing sensitive information, make sure you’re on a federal government site.
The site is secure.
The
https://
ensures that you are connecting to the official website and that any information you provide is encrypted and transmitted securely.
Menu
Search
Search
Health Information
A-Z Health Topics
Alzheimer's & Related Dementias
Caregiving
Cognitive Health
End of Life
Exercise and Physical Activity
Healthy Eating
Español
Get Print Publications
Infographics
Resources for Health Care Professionals
Research & Funding
All Research & Funding
Blog - Inside NIA
Clinical Trials
Training & Career Development
Grants & Funding
Health Disparities Research
Research Resources
Labs at NIA
Division of Aging Biology
Division of Behavioral and Social Research
Division of Geriatrics and Clinical Gerontology
Division of Neuroscience
Division of Extramural Activities
Quick Links
NIA-Specific Funding Policies
Scientific Review
Small Business Program
Training Opportunities for Special Populations
Alzheimer's Disease and Related Dementias Funding Announcements
News & Events
All News & Events
News Releases
Announcements
Events
Research Highlights
Multimedia
Quick Links
Media Inquiries
Alzheimer’s & Related Dementias Press Kit
About NIA
All About NIA
Budget & Testimony
Strategic Directions
National Advisory Council on Aging (NACA)
Advances in Aging and Alzheimer's Research
Scientific Workforce Diversity
Staff Directory
Careers
Student Resources
Connect with NIA
Contact NIA
Español
Search
Search
Breadcrumb
Home
News & Events
Alzheimer’s progression in Down syndrome appears similar to other genetic, early onset forms of the disease
News Releases
Alzheimer’s progression in Down syndrome appears similar to other genetic, early onset forms of the disease
December 12, 2022
Alzheimer's Disease
Robert Bock, 301-496-5133, nichdpress@mail.nih.gov
Christopher G. Thomas, 301-496-1752, NIAPressTeam@mail.nih.gov
NIH-funded study suggests people with Down syndrome may benefit from Alzheimer’s disease treatments
Amyloid plaques — protein clumps that are one of the hallmarks of Alzheimer’s disease — occur at roughly the same level in the brains of people with Down syndrome who have Alzheimer’s as they do in people with forms of hereditary, early-onset Alzheimer’s, according to research funded by the National Institutes of Health. Based on the largest study of its kind to date, the findings suggest that individuals with Alzheimer’s and Down syndrome may benefit from participating in studies on Alzheimer’s therapies aimed at slowing formation of amyloid plaques.
The study was conducted by Beau Ances, M.D., Ph.D., of Washington University in St. Louis, and colleagues from the Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer Network (DIAN) and the Alzheimer’s Biomarkers Consortium–Down Syndrome (ABC-DS). It appears in Lancet Neurology. NIH funding was provided by the National Institute on Aging (NIA), the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD), and the
Investigation of Co-Occurring Conditions Across the Lifespan to Understand Down Syndrome Project.
“The similarity suggests that there may be common mechanisms underlying Alzheimer’s disease in people with Down syndrome and other inherited forms of Alzheimer’s,” said Diana W. Bianchi, M.D., NICHD Director. “Future advances in understanding Alzheimer’s in people with Down syndrome may contribute to insights into other forms of the disease.”
Plaques are composed largely of aggregated beta-amyloid proteins, which are encoded by the amyloid precursor protein (APP) gene and found on chromosome 21. Because people with Down syndrome are born with an extra full or partial copy of chromosome 21, they have three copies of the APP gene. This causes them to produce too much beta-amyloid protein, leading to the formation of plaques.
For the current study, researchers periodically conducted MRI and amyloid positron emission tomography scans of the brains of people with Down syndrome. They then compared the results to brain scans of people who have early-onset Alzheimer’s, resulting from inheriting pathogenic variants of the APP gene or the PSEN1 or PSEN2 genes, which code for enzymes that break down amyloid precursor proteins.
The study involved 192 individuals with Down syndrome and 33 sibling controls from the ABC-DS trial. It also involved 265 carriers of either the APP, PSEN1, or PSEN2 variants and 169 non-carrier family members who were participants in the NIA-funded DIAN trial, also part of the control group.
“Multiple pathways may mediate brain damage in Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias,” said Richard J. Hodes, M.D., NIA Director. “Studies like this can help researchers understand the commonalities or differences in pathways that mediate brain damage in distinct at-risk populations, such as those with Down syndrome and those with dominantly inherited early-onset Alzheimer’s. These findings may thus provide clues to developing treatments for these devastating disorders.”
Overall, the amount of amyloid burden was similar in the brains of people with Down syndrome to those who carry the gene variants for early-onset forms of Alzheimer’s disease. For both groups, levels of brain amyloid were higher than the control group. In addition, the participants with Down syndrome and early-onset Alzheimer’s who showed signs of cognitive decline on thinking and memory tests had higher levels of amyloid than their counterparts who showed no signs of cognitive decline.
One difference between the two groups was seen in the pattern of brain amyloid plaque formation. The participants who had early-onset Alzheimer’s had plaques in all areas of the cerebral cortex, the outermost layer of the brain. In contrast, the brains of people with Down syndrome did not have plaque deposits in the middle of the occipital lobe, the portion of the cerebral cortex at the back of the brain.
The authors concluded that people with Down syndrome may experience a very similar pattern of brain amyloid accumulation to that seen in people with early-onset forms of Alzheimer’s. The findings also show the benefit of including individuals with Down syndrome in clinical trials — health care advances are made for people with Down syndrome as well as the general public.
Reference
Boerwinkle AH, et al. Comparison of amyloid burden in individuals with Down syndrome versus autosomal dominant Alzheimer’s disease: A cross-sectional study. The Lancet Neurology. Epub 2022 doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(22)00408-2.
About the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD): NICHD leads research and training to understand human development, improve reproductive health, enhance the lives of children and adolescents, and optimize abilities for all. For more information, visit https://www.nichd.nih.gov.
About the National Institute on Aging (NIA): NIA leads the U.S. federal government effort to conduct and support research on aging and the health and well-being of older people. Learn more about age-related cognitive change and neurodegenerative diseases via NIA’s Alzheimer's and related Dementias Education and Referral (ADEAR) Center website. Visit the main NIA website for information about a range of aging topics, in English and Spanish, and stay connected.
About the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation’s medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit https://www.nih.gov.
NIH...Turning Discovery Into Health®
###
Latest News
Insomnia drug may lower levels of Alzheimer’s proteins
05/25/2023
Return to top
Quick links
A-Z health topics
Clinical trials
Careers
Research divisions & contacts
Staff directory
Workforce diversity
NIH COVID-19 information
Contact NIA
niaic@nia.nih.gov
800-222-2225
Contact us
Follow us
Facebook
Twitter
LinkedIn
YouTube
Newsletters
Sign up to receive updates and resources delivered to your inbox.
Sign up
nia.nih.gov
An official website of the National Institutes of Health
Accessibility support
FOIA requests
No FEAR Act data
Office of the Inspector General
Performance reports
Vulnerability disclosure policy
Policies and notices
USA.gov