NIH unveils new online tool to improve Alzheimer’s clinical trials recruitment | National Institute on Aging
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here's how you know
Here's how you know
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services (HHS)
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
The .gov means it’s official.
Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before sharing sensitive information, make sure you’re on a federal government site.
The site is secure.
The
https://
ensures that you are connecting to the official website and that any information you provide is encrypted and transmitted securely.
Menu
Search
Search
Health Information
A-Z Health Topics
Alzheimer's & Related Dementias
Caregiving
Cognitive Health
End of Life
Exercise and Physical Activity
Healthy Eating
Español
Get Print Publications
Infographics
Resources for Health Care Professionals
Research & Funding
All Research & Funding
Blog - Inside NIA
Clinical Trials
Training & Career Development
Grants & Funding
Health Disparities Research
Research Resources
Labs at NIA
Division of Aging Biology
Division of Behavioral and Social Research
Division of Geriatrics and Clinical Gerontology
Division of Neuroscience
Division of Extramural Activities
Quick Links
NIA-Specific Funding Policies
Scientific Review
Small Business Program
Training Opportunities for Special Populations
Alzheimer's Disease and Related Dementias Funding Announcements
News & Events
All News & Events
News Releases
Announcements
Events
Research Highlights
Multimedia
Quick Links
Media Inquiries
Alzheimer’s & Related Dementias Press Kit
About NIA
All About NIA
Budget & Testimony
Strategic Directions
National Advisory Council on Aging (NACA)
Advances in Aging and Alzheimer's Research
Scientific Workforce Diversity
Staff Directory
Careers
Student Resources
Connect with NIA
Contact NIA
Español
Search
Search
Breadcrumb
Home
News & Events
NIH unveils new online tool to improve Alzheimer’s clinical trials recruitment
News Releases
NIH unveils new online tool to improve Alzheimer’s clinical trials recruitment
July 29, 2021
Alzheimer's DiseaseClinical TrialsDementiasHealth Disparities
Joe Balintfy, 301-496-1752, NIAPressTeam@mail.nih.gov
Outreach Pro aimed at increasing underrepresented population participation
The National Institute on Aging (NIA), part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), has launched a new online research tool to help increase participation by traditionally underrepresented populations in clinical trials on Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias. Unveiled at the Alzheimer's Association International Conference (AAIC), Outreach Pro enables those involved with leading clinical research to create and customize participant recruitment communications such as websites, handouts, videos, and social media posts.
“We are facing a critical and growing need for people living with Alzheimer’s and related dementias, as well as those at higher risk, and healthy people, to participate in clinical trials,” said NIA Director Richard J. Hodes M.D. “That need is especially acute for frequently underrepresented groups such as Black and Hispanic Americans, which is why Outreach Pro includes an emphasis on helping clinical trial researchers connect with these and other important communities.”
The newly launched Outreach Pro, a tool for Alzheimer’s researchers who need to create and customize recruitment resources such as websites, handouts, videos, and social media posts.Outreach Pro is an integral part of NIA’s efforts to implement the National Strategy for Recruitment and Participation in Alzheimer’s and Related Dementias Clinical Research. Released in 2018, the national strategy was developed in collaboration with the Alzheimer’s Association with input from government, private sector, academic, and industry stakeholders, as well as from individuals, caregivers, and study participants. The overarching goal is to engage broader segments of the public, including underrepresented populations, to participate in Alzheimer’s and related dementias clinical research.
“It is critical that clinical trials have appropriate representation to ensure we have a complete understanding of how well different therapies or approaches to dementia care work in different populations,” said Holly Massett, Ph.D., NIA senior advisor on clinical research recruitment and engagement, who oversees the implementation of the national strategy. “Outreach Pro was designed to provide well-tested and culturally appropriate outreach materials that resonate with diverse populations and encourage them to participate in clinical trials.”
To use Outreach Pro, researchers and clinicians first select desired templates with one of three communication goals in mind: 1) to educate about Alzheimer’s, related dementias, and/or brain health; 2) to increase awareness and interest in Alzheimer’s and related dementias clinical trials; or, 3) to provide information about a specific Alzheimer’s or related dementias clinical trial currently enrolling participants. Each template can then be tailored using a central library of messages, headlines, photos, and text that have been extensively tested among individuals representing diverse and underserved populations.
Outreach Pro’s current library of content includes materials specifically designed for a range of audiences, including Black Americans and Hispanics/Latinos. Initially, the materials will be available in English and Spanish, and there are plans underway to add Asian American and Pacific Islander resources and languages by fall 2021. Materials for American Indian and Alaska Native communities will be developed and added in 2022.
NIA developed Outreach Pro and its content systematically by using literature reviews, environmental scans, listening sessions with stakeholders, focus groups, national surveys, and user testing. The NIA team created tool features in a culturally responsive way, so that all stages of content development reflect the culture and languages of the communities for whom the materials are designed. NIA plans to add content and scale up the tool’s capabilities based on feedback and performance measurement.
Outreach Pro expands NIA’s resources dedicated to recruitment diversity. For example, in 2020, NIA funded four exploratory Alzheimer’s Disease Research Centers that will broaden research initiatives with underrepresented groups, including Black Americans, Native Americans, and those in rural communities. In 2019, NIA launched the Alzheimer’s and Dementia Outreach, Recruitment, and Engagement (ADORE) Resources. The ADORE repository offers the research community resources to support recruitment and retention of volunteers into clinical trials and studies.
In total, NIA is supporting 270 Alzheimer’s and related dementias clinical trials, including those focused on lifestyle and caregiving interventions. Late-stage trials often include thousands of participants, requiring even more volunteers to help researchers meet recruitment goals for diversity.
Masset will present Outreach Pro: The National Institute on Aging’s (NIA) Online Tool for AD/ADRD Clinical Studies Recruitment and Engagement of Diverse and Underserved Populations, at AAIC on Friday, July 30, 2021, 1-2:15 p.m. MDT. Press information for AAIC can be found at www.alz.org/aaic/pressroom.asp.
About the National Institute on Aging (NIA): NIA leads the U.S. federal government effort to conduct and support research on aging and the health and well-being of older people. Learn more about age-related cognitive change and neurodegenerative diseases via NIA’s Alzheimer's and related Dementias Education and Referral (ADEAR) Center website. Visit the main NIA website for information about a range of aging topics, in English and Spanish, and stay connected.
About the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation's medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit www.nih.gov.
NIH...Turning Discovery Into Health®
###
Latest News
Insomnia drug may lower levels of Alzheimer’s proteins
05/25/2023
Return to top
Quick links
A-Z health topics
Clinical trials
Careers
Research divisions & contacts
Staff directory
Workforce diversity
NIH COVID-19 information
Contact NIA
niaic@nia.nih.gov
800-222-2225
Contact us
Follow us
Facebook
Twitter
LinkedIn
YouTube
Newsletters
Sign up to receive updates and resources delivered to your inbox.
Sign up
nia.nih.gov
An official website of the National Institutes of Health
Accessibility support
FOIA requests
No FEAR Act data
Office of the Inspector General
Performance reports
Vulnerability disclosure policy
Policies and notices
USA.gov