Tailored, earlier cardiac rehab program shows physical, emotional benefits for heart failure patients | National Institute on Aging
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here's how you know
Here's how you know
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services (HHS)
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
The .gov means it’s official.
Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before sharing sensitive information, make sure you’re on a federal government site.
The site is secure.
The
https://
ensures that you are connecting to the official website and that any information you provide is encrypted and transmitted securely.
Menu
Search
Search
Health Information
A-Z Health Topics
Alzheimer's & Related Dementias
Caregiving
Cognitive Health
End of Life
Exercise and Physical Activity
Healthy Eating
Español
Get Print Publications
Infographics
Resources for Health Care Professionals
Research & Funding
All Research & Funding
Blog - Inside NIA
Clinical Trials
Training & Career Development
Grants & Funding
Health Disparities Research
Research Resources
Labs at NIA
Division of Aging Biology
Division of Behavioral and Social Research
Division of Geriatrics and Clinical Gerontology
Division of Neuroscience
Division of Extramural Activities
Quick Links
NIA-Specific Funding Policies
Scientific Review
Small Business Program
Training Opportunities for Special Populations
Alzheimer's Disease and Related Dementias Funding Announcements
News & Events
All News & Events
News Releases
Announcements
Events
Research Highlights
Multimedia
Quick Links
Media Inquiries
Alzheimer’s & Related Dementias Press Kit
About NIA
All About NIA
Budget & Testimony
Strategic Directions
National Advisory Council on Aging (NACA)
Advances in Aging and Alzheimer's Research
Scientific Workforce Diversity
Staff Directory
Careers
Student Resources
Connect with NIA
Contact NIA
Español
Search
Search
Breadcrumb
Home
News & Events
Tailored, earlier cardiac rehab program shows physical, emotional benefits for heart failure patients
News Releases
Tailored, earlier cardiac rehab program shows physical, emotional benefits for heart failure patients
May 17, 2021
Chronic ConditionsClinical ResearchFrailtyPhysical Activity
Chip Rose, 301-496-1752, NIAPressTeam@mail.nih.gov
NIH-funded clinical trial improved frailty, depression and overall quality of life
An innovative cardiac rehabilitation intervention started earlier and more custom-tailored to the individual improved physical function, frailty, quality of life, and depression in hospitalized heart failure patients, compared to traditional rehabilitation programs. Supported by the National Institute on Aging (NIA), part of the National institutes of Health, these new study results were published May 16 in the New England Journal of Medicine and also presented at the American College of Cardiology’s 70th Annual Scientific Session.
“Designing earlier and more personalized individual-specific approaches to heart failure rehab shows great promise for improving outcomes for this common but complex condition that is one of the leading causes of hospitalization for older adults,” said NIA Director Richard J. Hodes, M.D. “These results mark encouraging progress on a path to better overall quality of life and physical function for the millions of older Americans who develop heart failure each year.”
For this new study, a research team led by Dalane W. Kitzman, M.D., professor of cardiovascular medicine and geriatrics/gerontology at Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, followed 349 clinical trial participants with heart failure enrolled in “A Trial of Rehabilitation Therapy in Older Acute Heart Failure Patients” (REHAB-HF). Participants had an average of five comorbidities — diabetes, obesity, high blood pressure, lung disease or kidney disease — that also contributed to loss of physical function.
In an earlier pilot study, Kitzman and his colleagues at Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, and the Sidney Kimmel Medical College at Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, found striking deficits in strength, mobility and balance, along with the expected loss of endurance in older patients with acute heart failure, the vast majority of whom were categorized as frail or pre-frail. The team decided to focus on improving patients’ physical function, which already weakened by chronic heart failure and age, was worsened by the traditional cardiac hospital experience featuring lots of bedrest and resulting in loss of functions that tended to persist after discharge.
The REHAB-HF team designed earlier and more customized exercise programs that emphasized improving balance, strength, mobility and endurance. They also began REHAB-HF during a patient’s hospital stay when feasible instead of waiting until the traditional six weeks after discharge. After release from the hospital, the study participants shifted to outpatient sessions three times per week for three months.
Compared to a control group that received usual cardiac rehab care, REHAB-HF participants showed marked gains in measures of physical functioning and overall quality of life, including significant progress in Short Physical Performance Battery, a series of tests to evaluate lower extremity function and mobility, and a six-minute walk test. They also had notable improvements in self-perception of their health status and depression surveys compared to pre-trial baselines. More than 80 percent of REHAB-HF participants reported they were still doing their exercises six months after completing their participation in the study.
“These findings will inform choices of heart failure rehabilitation strategies that could lead to better physical and emotional outcomes,” said Evan Hadley, M.D., director of NIA’s Division of Geriatrics and Clinical Gerontology. “Tailored interventions like REHAB-HF that target heart failure’s related decline in physical abilities can result in real overall benefits for patients.”
The study did not show significant differences in related clinical events including rates of hospital readmission for any reason or for heart-failure related rehospitalizations. The research team plans to further explore that and other issues through future expansions of REHAB-HF into larger and longer-term trials with broader participant subgroups.
This study was funded in part by NIH grants R01AG045551, R01AG18915, P30AG021332, P30AG028716, and U24AG059624.
Reference: Kitzman et al. Rehabilitation Intervention in Older Patients with Acute Heart Failure with Preserved versus Reduced Ejection Fraction. New England Journal of Medicine. 2021 May 16 doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2026141.
About the National Institute on Aging (NIA): NIA leads the U.S. federal government effort to conduct and support research on aging and the health and well-being of older people. Learn more about age-related cognitive change and neurodegenerative diseases via NIA’s Alzheimer's and related Dementias Education and Referral (ADEAR) Center website. Visit the main NIA website for information about a range of aging topics, in English and Spanish, and stay connected.
About the National Institutes of Health (NIH): NIH, the nation's medical research agency, includes 27 Institutes and Centers and is a component of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. NIH is the primary federal agency conducting and supporting basic, clinical, and translational medical research, and is investigating the causes, treatments, and cures for both common and rare diseases. For more information about NIH and its programs, visit www.nih.gov.
NIH...Turning Discovery Into Health®
###
Latest News
Insomnia drug may lower levels of Alzheimer’s proteins
05/25/2023
Return to top
Quick links
A-Z health topics
Clinical trials
Careers
Research divisions & contacts
Staff directory
Workforce diversity
NIH COVID-19 information
Contact NIA
niaic@nia.nih.gov
800-222-2225
Contact us
Follow us
Facebook
Twitter
LinkedIn
YouTube
Newsletters
Sign up to receive updates and resources delivered to your inbox.
Sign up
nia.nih.gov
An official website of the National Institutes of Health
Accessibility support
FOIA requests
No FEAR Act data
Office of the Inspector General
Performance reports
Vulnerability disclosure policy
Policies and notices
USA.gov